## Kant

### Introduction
> There is no doubt whatever that all our cognition [_Erkenntnis_] begins with experience; for how else should the cognitive faculty [_Erkenntnisvermögen_] be awakened into exercise if not through objects that stimulate our senses and in part themselves produce representations, in part bring the activity of our understanding into motion to compare these, to connect or separate them, and thus to work up the raw material of sensible impressions into a cognition of objects that is called experience? As far as time is concerned, then, no cognition in us precedes experience, and with experience every cognition begins. 

> But although all our cognition commences with experience, yet it does not on that account all arise from experience. For it could well be that even our experiential cognition is a composite of that which we receive through impressions and that which our own cognitive faculty (merely prompted by sensible impressions) provides out of itself, which addition we cannot distinguish from that fundamental material until long practice has made us attentive to it and skilled in separating it out. 

> It is therefore at least a question requiring closer investigation, and one not to be dismissed at first glance, whether there is any such cognition independent of all experience and even of all impressions of the senses. One calls such cognitions a priori, and distinguishes them from empirical ones, which have their sources a posteriori, namely in experience { | Kant, et al., 1998 | B1 | |zu:243096:CRRNTX4C}

So famously begins Kant's introduction to the second edition of his _Critique of Pure Reason_ (CPR; page references by tradition refer to the A (1781) and B (1797) editions as A#/B#, sometimes only A# or B#).  The question that must not be dismissed, whether there are _any_ cognitions independent of _all_ experience remains altogether current today.  In particular, this is the basic research program of a "soft" nativism that attempts to determine the minimum necessary a priori knowledge of language required for its acquisition { | Pinker, 2007 | | |zu:243096:NS8PZZ8U}.  Kant's term _Erkenntnis_ is notoriously difficult to translate, denoting both the process of thinking as well as its result, knowledge.  Guyer and Wood's translation as "cognition" attempts to cover both senses, while also hinting at the arguably foundational role of Kant's work for modern "cognitive science".  My goal here is review Kant's teaching on the relations between a priori knowledge, experience, and spacetime, to support a specific proposal about the semantic status of functional and thematic elements in language.  Since I cannot hope to present Kant's arguments for his cognitive model with any completeness, here I will first gloss some basic terms by attempting to unpack a central conclusion of CPR, then discuss Kant's theory of judgment, focusing especially on his notion of the "schematism".

> All principles of the pure understanding are nothing further than a priori principles of the possibility of experience, and all synthetic a priori propositions are related to the latter alone, indeed their possibility itself rests entirely on this relation (B294).

For all their disagreements, the rationalists and empiricists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries agreed on a fundamental point of epistemologiy: knowledge derived from experience is contingent, while necessary (rule-bound) truths are irreducibly a priori.  Rationalists take reason to be the essential faculty of thought, which therefore imposes its structures on the world, while empiricists instead assign primacy to perception, thus calling into question the necessity of universal laws.  Cause and effect, per Hume's analysis, might simply amount to correlation.  Kant's cognitive model, in some sense, combines these perspectives by asserting two (at least; see below) primitive faculties to the human knowing subject: sensibility and the understanding.

Kant frequently uses the term "representation", seemingly as the the most general name for mental states or "constituent or element of cognition" { | Gardner, 1999 | p. 29| |zu:243096:GS4D2WGD}. If consciousness, in its essence, is consciousness OF (something), then that something is a representation.  Kant organizes the various types of representations into the following taxonomy (A320/B376):

[FIXME diagram]    

**Sensibility** is the faculty that yields sensations, subjective representations in response to stimuli from outside or inside (e.g. feelings).  Sensations are subjective because, on their own, they simply describe the effect of stimuli on the subject, without referring consciousness to their sources.  Sensation is thus the phenomenal content of representations, their **matter**, intrinsic to the experience of objects and individual and non-relational.  **Form** by contrast denotes the structure of a representation, the relations between its components and how as a whole it relates to other representations. 

When consciousness takes a sensation as an objective representation, a sign pointing to some referent, then the representation is an **intuition**.  Intuitions relate to objects immediately.  So while sensations at most refer to the state of the subject, intuitions refer to the triggering object, be it external or some process internal to the subject (e.g. in daydreaming) -- these are empirical intuitions -- or a priori, as space and time, as discussed below.  While intuitions are always particulars and emerge from the faculty of sensibility, **concepts** belong to the faculty of the understanding and represent general ideas.  

According to Kant, both intuitions and concepts are required in order to experience objects in thought, and neither can be reduced to the other.
> Our nature is so constituted that our intuition can never be other than sensible; that is, it contains only the mode in which we are affected by objects.  The faculty, on the other hand, which enables us to think the object of sensible intuition is the understanding.  Without sensibility no object would be given to us, without understanding no object would be thought [...] These two powers cannot exchange functions.  The understanding can intuit nothing, the senses can think nothing.  Only through their union can knowledge arise (A51/B75)

Concepts mediate the relationship of subject to object "by means of a feature which several things may have in common" (A320/B377).  Empirical (a posteriori) concepts, e.g. FAST, are generalizations from experience, thus world-dependent, while a priori concepts are necessary and therefore world-independent (or at least holding in all worlds containing human cognition).  Concepts can be simple or complex, in which case they are constructed out of simpler concepts, related via their formal shapes into what Hanna { | -Hanna, 2011 | | |zu:243096:CHI7HQCG} terms "conceptual microstructures".  Complex concepts can thus be analyzed into their simpler sub-parts.  Kant refers to such microstructures as the **intension** of the parent concept.  Hanna's example, the concept BACHELOR:
>    BACHELOR = < ADULT + UNMARRIED + MALE >

shows a pattern of conceptual decomposition that is suggestively parallel to Kats and Fodor's { | Katz, & Fodor, 1963 | | |zu:243096:5SRV85TV} feature-based theory of semantics.

The activity of explicating or unpacking the intension of a concept Kant terms **analysis**.  The analysis of a concept adds nothing to it; it simply describes the form and content of the concept.  So the proposition "a bachelor is unmarried" is analytic.  Concepts submitted to analysis must be previously assembled.  The process of composing disparate elements into unities is **synthesis**; synthesis maps multiple representations (a "manifold" in Kant's terminology) to single, connected representations.  A synthetic proposition is then one in which something not obviously already belonging to the subject is asserted of it.

> In all judgments [i.e. propositions] in which the relation of a subject to the predicate is thought [...], this relation is possible in two different ways. Either the predicate to the subject A, as something which is (covertly) contained in this concept A; or outside the concept A, although it does indeed stand in connection with it. In the one case I entitle the judgment analytic, in the other synthetic (A6/B10).

A synthetic proposition over empirical concepts requires both intuition and the understanding.  Sensibility and intuitions yield the phenomenal content (subjective and objective) of the propositions, while the understanding supplies its concepts.  So for (1), we have the set of intuitions (shape, feel, sound) associated with the ball.  This "manifold" of perception the understanding gathers into the unity of the empirical (generalized from experience) concept BALL, because the manifold of perception shares traits with the concept -- Kant says that in effect instances are gathered "under" concepts; synthesis is therefore at work in the constitution of both the extension and intension of concepts.

(1) The ball is red

Now in (1) the act of synthesizing the manifold of perception into the unity of the concept rests on the prior availability of empirical concepts BALL and RED.  But there is an additional synthesis, that of the two concepts in the predication relation, marked by the copula.  Here we have a bringing-under-concepts, a synthesis of the second order (a representation of a representation, Kant says) since it itself refers to two possibly empirical concepts.  Kant will say that we have here a higher level concept, that of predication, that ranges over more basic concepts.  Since this higher concept is free of experiential content -- Kant argues that the necessity of predication in general, as a thinkable concept, entails its being a priori -- the higher concept is a priori and indeed "pure", i.e. totally lacking in a posteriori elements.  Pure a priori concepts, which must derive from the very own nature of the understanding, are the "principles of the pure understanding", which Kant also terms **categories**, referring directly to Aristotle.

Like Aristotle, Kant offers a table of categories, arguing that unlike the Greek's, his are properly motivated.  If, as in the example of predication in (1), the principle unifying the proposition is the logical form of the proposition itself (e.g. predication), then, Kant reasons, the number and type of the pure concepts of the understanding must follow from the number and type of judgments (propositions).  Kant takes it as axiomatic that there are twelve such forms, categorized in four groups of three:

- Quantity of Judgments
    - Universal
    - Particular
    - Singular
- Quality 
    - Affirmative
    - Negative
    - Infinite
- Relation
    - Categorical
    - Hypothetical 
    - Disjunctive
- Modality
    - Problematic
    - Assertoric
    - Apodictic

The predication in (1) is thus a judgment of the type Relation/Categorical, whose sign is the copula.  Indeed it seems most of Kant's categories bear analogues to logical and functional notions in contemporary linguistic theory: Quantity to quantifiers; Quality to truth values; Modality to Force, mood, or modes in logic; and Relation to logical operators -- and, crucially, to modern interpretations of predication in its syntactic and semantic dimensions.  "The words 'all', 'always', 'necessarily' or even 'tomorrow' do not refer to something in experience; the do not derive from experience even if they are applicable to it" { | Deleuze, 1985 |p. 11 | |zu:243096:NCNG2VCG}.  Clearly the mapping from Kant's model to modern notions is imperfect since he misses many constructs, but the point stands that Kant can be understood as articulating an innatist position with respect to the logical-functional aspects of language, whose signs refer to a priori concepts that are constitutive of being human.  More precisely, were we to stick to Kantian terminology, we would describe the categories as "functional", reserving logic for the operations of abstract reason that, governed by the principles of identity and non-contradiction, constitute the necessary (but not sufficient) conditions for the veracity of judgments.  

> Whereas all intuitions, as sensible, rest on affections, concepts rest on functions. By 'function' I mean the unity of the act of bringing various representations under one common representation (A68/B93).

### Synthetic judgments

We are now in position to interpret the *first* part of Kant's summary statement at B294: 

> All principles of the pure understanding are nothing further than a priori principles of the possibility of experience [...]

While we cannot here traverse Kant's "proofs", we can understand his teaching: the categories are necessary, but not sufficient, conditions for all experience.  The passive activity of intuition and the active work of the pure concepts of understanding (through their projections into experience) are necessary for all human cognition.  Kant thus at once synthesizes elements of his rationalist, empiricist and idealist predecessors.  

To understand the second part of the claim at B294, that necessarily all synthetic a priori propositions are related to experience, we return to the basic question posed by Kant's CPR: how are synthetic a priori judgments possible?  In a synthetic judgment something new is said of the subject that could not be determined merely by logical analysis (else the judgment would be analytic), yet a priori judgments cannot contain new material from experience.  Nevertheless, Kant argues, we have synthetic a priori knowledge: the laws of arithmetic; of geometry; and "metaphysical" propositions that do not refer directly to experiential constructs, e.g. the proposition that "every event has a cause", where "event" and "cause", for Kant, share no features that might otherwise mediate their relationship in an analytic judgment.  That we have such a priori synthetic judgments is simply a "fact of knowledge" { | Deleuze, 1985 | | |zu:243096:NCNG2VCG}.  Being a priori, these judgments must themselves refer to non-experiential representations/concepts, e.g. substance, cause/effect, coexistence.  Such concepts, because of their universality, cannot arise from experience by association.  "One person combines the representation of a certain word with one thing, another with something else;" (B139) The character of induction from experience is like that of the Saussurean sign, accidental and non-universal; associational learning cannot yield the necessary and universal character of the pure concepts of the understanding.  What then is the status of such a priori concepts relative to experience?  

> The supreme principle of all synthetic judgments is, therefore: Every object stands under the necessary conditions of the synthetic unity of the manifold of intuition in a possible experience. (A157/B197)

Kant's thought here is that in all synthetic judgments, whether a priori or not, the representations contained in the judgment must be generated by the same cognitive process that structures the intuitions of sensibility into coherent representations.  This implies that all *valid* synthetic judgments must relate to *possible* intuitions; an a priori synthetic judgment must be capable of applying to experience in *some* possible world for it to be valid.  Otherwise it is empty, content-less, ineffectual, or, worse, a fantasy that distorts reality.  Non-vacuous expressions must be about something.  Put differently, if an a priori proposition referred to a non-sensible object (i.e. neither an object of sense nor of the recollective activity of the imagination), then its object would be suprasensible, i.e. noumenal, a thing in itself.  But Kant argues that access to things in themselves is foreclosed to the kind of knowers we are; therefore all a priori propositions must be able to refer to objects of sensibility.  Hence, per B294, a priori synthetic judgments have their possibility in their relationship to the objecthood of experience.

To say that objects of experience must be apprehended via the synthetic unity of the "manifold of intuition" implies, to Kant, that at the very least objects must be placed in a certain *time*.  Recall Kant's claim that "[o]ur nature is so constituted that our intuition can never be other than sensible" (A51/B75).  In Saussurean terms, sense perceptions and intuitions relate sensible *signifieds*, representations (mental objects), to their referents.  because signifiers are general, hence conceptual, intuitions are never complete signs.  Concepts and language belong to the understanding.  Intuitions are grounded in and immediately refer to their source, i.e. to external, internal or ideal causes, while sense perceptions refer to the psycho-physiological effect of objects on the subject.    According to Charles Parsons, "[r]elation to an object not by means of concepts, that is to say not by attributing properties to it, naturally suggests to us the modern notion of direct reference."  { | Guyer, (2013) | p. 65| |zu:243096:BTSDD4E5}  In Kripke's terminology, an intuition is a "rigid designator", as, being an individual particular, it picks out the same individual in all possible worlds in which that individual exists.  

### The forms of intuition: space and time
In an *empirical* intuition the representation is the signified for both the intuition and the sensation that enables it; the sensation is the referential relationship of the representation to the state of the subject, while the intuition is the objective reference to the (internal or external) cause.  So Kant is saying that necessarily for us humans an intuition must always be tied to some sensible representation.
> Intuitions (Anschauungen) for Kant are cognitions that are (i) immediate (directly referential, non-descriptive), (ii) sense-related, (iii) singular, (iv) object-dependent, and (v) prior to thought { | Hanna, 2011 | | p. 13 |zu:243096:CHI7HQCG}.

Crucially for Kant, the experience of an intuition does not necessarily entail an accompanying sensation.  Sensations, affects of the subject, are always a posteriori.  But the referent of an intuition might itself be ideal, in which case the intuition is a priori, i.e. innate, underspecified by experience.  An a priori intuition is still immediate, singular, referential, object-dependent; but what is the object if not a product of experience?  As as rigid designator such an intuition must apply in all relevant worlds; as pure, i.e. not context-dependent, it must apply to _all_ worlds.  Yet the referents of a priori intuitions cannot be pure concepts (which belong to understanding, not sensibility).  We require instead a type of cognition that shares aspects of sensibility and thought without reducing to either.  Kant's famous answer is that the kind of cognitive agents we are have exactly two pure intuitions, which are also the formal conditions of possibility of all sensibility: space and time.  

For Kant it is self-evident that all experience of objects must be structured in time, and that of external objects in space.  The apprehension of an external object is impossible without representing the topological relations proper to the object; dually, the proper experience of thought entails the proper sequencing of its elements in time.  

> If I separate from the representation of a body that which the understanding thinks about it, such as substance, force, divisibility, etc., as well as that which belongs to sensation, such as impenetrability, hardness, color, etc., something from this empirical intuition is still left for me, namely extension and form. These belong to the pure intuition, which occurs a priori, even without an actual object of the senses or sensation, as a mere form of sensibility in the mind.  (A20-21/B35)

We intuit space in external objects and intuit time in our internal representations.  Neither converse is true: "Time can no more be intuited externally than space can be intuited as something in us. " (A23/B37).  But since we represent external objects as representations, to the extent those are sequenced they are in time too; thus every experience is always structured by temporal relations.  Now, since "what is borrowed from experience always has only comparative universality, namely through induction" (A24/B39), it must be that the spatiality and temporality as such, as necessary conditions of experience, transcend experience; they are innate.  Kant notes that the very fact that we distinguish internal from external objects, as conditions of experience, shows that already a pre-reflective notion of space is at work, which again must transcend experience as its ground.

### The algebra of concepts

Concepts of the understanding are "discursive [...] general concept[s] of relations of things in general" (A24/B39) which, if complex, are constructed of simpler concepts.  Time (and space) cannot be analyzed into smaller bits that precede each other; rather, the parts exist as "limitations" of a single, infinite whole that constitutes their ground.  Thus the intension (in Kant's mereological sense) of time is infinite; but a concept is not thinkable if it is infinitely complex (its extension can of course be infinite), hence time (and space) must not belong to the understanding.

The intensional character of the Kantian notion of the concept, as a bottom-up construct of simpler concepts, is arguably reflected in modern semantics in the **algebras**, e.g. lattice structures { | Partee, et al., 1990 | | |zu:243096:TXCMEWQK}, that have seen widespread adoption, especially after Link's { | -Link, et al., 1983 | | |zu:243096:NQJ8NCU6} successful application to the treatment of plurals and mass/count nouns.  An algebra associates a set A with one or more n-ary operations on elements of the set; these operations must exhibit closure and uniqueness, i.e. given any set of operands, the operations must always return the same value for those operands, which must belong to A.  

Zwarts { | -Zwarts, (2005) | | |zu:243096:7VJC9ND8} presents a straightforward yet powerful algebra for the interpretation of directional Adps.  He defines his path algebra as the pair <**P,** +>, where P is the set of paths and + is a concatenation operation on paths.  A path is defined as a function mapping the interval [0, 1] to positions in space, where **p**(0) gives the start position and **p**(1) the end point.  Paths are then concatenated on condition that the **p**(1) of one correspond to the **p**(0) of the other.  Zwarts then links paths to events by means of a thematic role on the event, which he labels TRACE.  For an event e, TRACE(e) gives the path associated with the event.  This allows Zwarts to describe the compositional semantics of PPs with verbs (also that of path-denoting adverbials).   By defining a notion of cumulative reference, whereby a set of paths is cumulative if the concatenation of any two paths is also in the set, Zwarts is able to connect the "aspectual" character of PPs, i.e. their status as bounded or unbounded, to their referential class:
> A PP is unbounded [non-telic, has no enpoint] if and only if it has cumulative reference.
> A PP is bounded if and only it if does not have cumulative reference.  { | Zwarts, (2005) | p. 753| |zu:243096:7VJC9ND8}

From here Zwarts develops a fine-grained model-theoretic analysis of individual directional Adps and explains their effect on the aspect of the events they modify.  Many broadly similar analyses of linguistic phenomena are found in the semantic literature.  Subsequent to Link's analysis of NP reference types, Bach { | Bach, (1986) | | |zu:243096:PQU5967J} analyzed the aspectual classification of events via a lattice over atomic events.  Kiparsky { | -Kiparsky, (1998) | | |zu:243096:RC8FB3UF} deployed a similar aspectual approach to the semantic analysis of partitive case, implying an algebraic formalization parallel to that of Zwarts.  Grimm { | -Grimm, (2011) | | |zu:243096:RRZ8Z6VN} constructed an algebraic lattice of semantic proto-roles to relate argument realization to structural Case.  Krifka made use of lattice structures to connect NP reference types to event structure { | -Krifka, (1990) | | |zu:243096:3P3G7GKA}{ | -Krifka, (1992) | | |zu:243096:4AHXEQC8}, which he subsequently generalized into an explicitly semantic theory of spatiotemporal and event structures { | Krifka, (1998) | | |zu:243096:8BDB9RIN}.

In a similar, though not explicitly algebraic, vein, Warglien et al { | Warglien, et al., 2012 | | |zu:243096:KJJMJVRC} model events as forces acting in conceptual vector spaces, a formalization that easily translates to algebras over concept spaces[^wgwKant].  

All of these formal descriptions specify in one form or other an operation that builds structures out of simpler units.  Kant's hypothesizes a single, fundamental cognitive function at work in such structure-building, and names it synthesis; today we might say Merge.


### The imagination
If the structure of concepts in Kant has its linguistic parallel in the algebraic complexes described above, does the hypothesis of a single generative principle that builds such structures bear its reflex in Kant's model of cognition?  Recall that for Kant _pure_ (wholly a priori) concepts, as structured signifying elements, belong to the understanding; yet to the extent that they are products of synthesis (the union of the diverse, putting things together), they are not products of the understanding, since, when it comes to a prior knowledge, the understanding already knows everything it knows, as it were.  On its own, prior to experience, _the understanding is not productive_.  Reason too is only capable of abstract logic, and indeed the targets of Kant's demystifying philosophy are the philosophical systems -- the rationalism of Descartes and Leibniz -- that would have reason project itself into reality, creating synthesis and manufacturing concepts.  

Indeed, even in the constitution of a posteriori (empirical) concepts, the understanding is a necessary but not sufficient, an efficient cause.  In his textbook on _Logic_ Kant specifies the responsibilities of the understanding in concept formation:

> The logical acts of the understanding, by which conceptions as to their form are engendered, are,

> 1.  the _comparison_, or the comparing of representations with one another in relation to the unity of consciousness,
 2.  the _reflection_, or reflecting how various representations may be comprehended in one consciousness; and finally,
 3.  the _abstraction_, or the separation of all that by which the given representations are distinguished from one another.  { | Kant, (1819) | p. 131| |zu:243096:MGBIGX6P}

The understanding processes, evaluates and judges relationships between representations -- it "legislates", according to Deleuze -- but crucially does not originate the syntheses in play.  A synthesis, as a higher order structure, a representation that hierarchically relates component representations, emerges from a creative act, an _original_, unexpected, non-derivative act beyond the analytical competence of the understanding.  Experience too cannot on its own yield synthetic representations since the immediate impact of experience on the receptive subject can only be intuitive, and intuitions are never articulated.  The understanding thinks (compares, reflects, abstracts) and judges but cannot generate new knowledge; conversely, the sensibility induces novel representations in the subject but cannot think.  We require a third, mediating faculty that is licensed to propose relations that, as it were, may not make sense -- not necessarily conform to the rules of the understanding.  Kant famously termed this creative faculty the **imagination**.  The imagination is then the origin of all syntheses:

> Synthesis in general is, as we shall subsequently see, the mere effect of the imagination, of a _blind_ [my emphasis] though indispensable function of the soul without which we would have no cognition at all, but of which we are seldom even conscious (A78/B103). 

"Blind" must remind us of the deaf or blind thoughts of Leibniz, those products of purely symbolic processing.  Kant's third faculty is a primitive of the human cognitive apparatus, thus not reducible to the others[^understandingConfusion].  It is the "faculty of representing in intuition an object that is not itself present" (B151).  Kant marks a clean distinction between the _productive_ versus the _reproductive_ imagination.  The latter is memory, the capacity to re-experience past intuitions, thus a matter for psychologists; operating a posteriori only, it yields experience-dependent associative knowledge but cannot give rise to pure knowledge.  The productive imagination is instead self-driven, subjective activity independent of external objects: "[I]nsofar as the imagination is spontaneity, I also occasionally call it the productive imagination, and thereby distinguish it from the reproductive imagination, whose synthesis is subject solely to empirical laws, namely those of association [...]" (B152).  We thus see how, through his delicate disentangling of human cognition, Kant sets up a three-way distinction between the domains of perception, conceptual thought, and the raw generative creativity that animates the relation of the first two, of thought to objects.  This division of cognitive labor suggests for concept formation a "generate-and-filter" model, perhaps similar to early GB approaches to the generation of sentences { | Chomsky, (1993) | | |zu:243096:P8AIRGME}: the imagination, acting unconsciously, proposes syntheses that the rule-bound understanding then accepts or rejects.  

[^understandingConfusion]: Though Kant, confusingly, sometimes generalizes the understanding to all transcendental activity, including the work of the imagination; especially so in the B edition.

### The schematism
The mediatory function of the imagination extends beyond the generation of structured representations.  Once Kant has established that pure concepts, specifically the categories, are necessary for any experience whatsoever, he is confronted by the question of how it is possible for a priori concepts to apply to the products of experience.  The problem for Kant is that for, say, a circular object to be judged a circle, i.e. for the manifold of intuitions triggered by a ball to be placed under the concept CIRCLE,  some property of the one must match the other -- Kant's "mark" that defines the set of all things circular.  This works for geometrical concepts, but pure concepts of the understanding are by definition free of every aspect of experience; they explicitly cannot incorporate a posteriori notions.  Kant thus concludes that a "third" is required to enable concepts to apply to experience.  Again he invokes the imagination as that special go-between that is simultaneously intellectual and sensible.  The imagination, as every student of Kant soon learns, is responsible for the production of **schemata**, devices by which intellectual concepts are made sensible.  The imagination schematizes (Deleuze).

Kant teaches that full (authentic, knowing, useful, true) thought is characterized by its "aboutness", its relation to objects: "thoughts without content are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind"(A51/B75).  Autarkic thought is nothing because it can only develop itself analytically.  But since objects enter consciousness through its receptivity  -- whether internally, via the imagination, or as sense perceptions -- thus as intuitions, then objective thinking must contain the artifacts of sensibility.  This implies that all thinking requires images, whether triggered by sense or built by the imagination  "We cannot think a line without _drawing_ it in thought" (B154).  Given his major result that experience also always requires categories and concepts, Kant is faced with the problem of how abstract concepts relate to concrete images -- an ancient philosophical problem, that of crossing Plato's divided line separating the temporal from the ideal (_Republic_, Book VI).  An image on its own cannot stand for a concept because it lacks universality: "No image could ever be adequate to the concept of triangle in general" (A141/B180).  A schema of the imagination mediates between concept and image because it specifies a general set of _rules for the construction of an image_.  Kant marks a core distinction between the process of generating an image, in accordance with rules determined by the concept, and the image itself.  This suggests that in all apprehension of objects the mind constructs a rule-determined image by which sensible representations are organized and recognized as instances of concepts.  The active and constructive work of the imagination in even seemingly passive apprehension has, perhaps, its linguistic reflex in models of sentence processing that emphasize the active role of the receiver's grammatical knowledge, e.g. Weinberg { | -Weinberg, et al., (2001) | | |zu:243096:2TQC4SHV}.  

> The concept of a dog signifies a rule in accordance with which my imagination can specify the shape of a four-footed animal in general, without being restricted to any single particular shape that experience offers me or any possible image that I can exhibit in concreto (A141/B180).

This is a specification for a process of signification, here that of the empirical (a posteriori) concept DOG.  While for Saussure the signifier "dog" maps to a mental image (the signified), the Kantian perspective suggests that "dog" first points to a concept DOG whose intensional (in Kant's sense) structure formally describes an assembly of inferior concepts, e.g. LEG, which may themselves be complex.  The complex as a whole functions as a set of instructions to the imagination.  The latter supplies the required intuitions, relating them in space and time to yield the signified image.  The understanding then relates the produced image to the manifold of perception to produce the judgment: "it is a dog".  The schema, which for an a posteriori concept is identical to the concept, is the function that maps the concept to the image; and the image, once produced as a unified complex of intuitions, is a "one", an unstructured particular (as all intuitions are), can do nothing but refer.  The image is neither a set nor a label nor a name, it is just "dog".  The sign: 
>"dog" -> DOG -> [dog image] 

as a whole can be understood as a lexical Root per Distributed Morphology { | Halle, et al., (1993) | | |zu:243096:F29XSXXC} or as an extension of Fodor's disquotational lexical hypothesis (1998, referenced in { | Boeckx, &amp; Hinzen, (2011) | | |zu:243096:DTP7QA9Q}), whereby the meaning of an atomic term is simply the atomic concept itself.  The Kantian angle adds a step in the process of signification, since while the concept itself is not atomic, it yields an atomic image.  Crucially, since the concept is not the complete image (contra Locke), the image is underspecified by the concept -- constrained, but not fully determined.  The imagination therefore makes an original contribution to the construction.  On what basis?  Kant does not know: 

> This schematism of our understanding with regard to appearances and their mere form is a hidden art in the depths of the human soul, whose true operations we can divine from nature and lay unveiled before our eyes only with difficulty (A141/B180).

We may not be any wiser today.  Bernstein sees a parallel here with Wittgenstein's use-theoretic account of linguistic meaning, whereby the meaning of a concept is its use.  Kant's appeal to an unanalyzable capacity for the use of concepts in experience via images rejoins his treatment of the capacity for judging, in particular with his reference of "mother wit" and stupidity:

> the power of judgment is a special talent that cannot be taught but only practiced. Thus this is also what is specific to so -called mother-wit, the lack of which cannot be made good by any school [...]  The lack of the power of judgment is that which is properly called stupidity, and such a failing is not to be helped (A133/B177).

Kant cautions that the rationalist attempt to devise algorithms to explicate the interaction of reason and experience can only result in an endless regress in reason, one rule implying another.  "You cannot be a rationalist all the way"  { | Bernstein, (2006) | | |zu:243096:TRQURVT2}.  He interrupts this regress with the doctrine of mother wit, which is founded on the artful imagination that creates images of concepts appropriate to the relevant world.

The discussion about Kant's schematism so far has centered on empirical concepts, for which the schema amounts to application of the concept to a world.  Now pure concepts, the categories, are distinct from empirical concepts in not incorporating any sensible content.  If empirical concepts specify rules for the generation of images, categories can only refer to other intellectual concepts as "super-rules" { | Bernstein, (2006) | | |zu:243096:TRQURVT2}, higher-order functors in Abney's sense.  The importance of the schematism emerges when Kant considers the application of higher order, pure concepts to experience.  An image-creation strategy is no longer possible since the structures denoted by the categories are purely intellectual: Kant agrees with Hume that cause/effect relations cannot be perceived.  Since the categories must nevertheless apply, a medium for representation is required that is universal, a priori, sensible, and sufficiently structured to capture the logical relations entailed by the categories.  *Time* is that medium because it connects all experience, whether inner or outer, into its forms.  Its structure, discrete moment sequenced by an ordering relation, supports the analogies to the categories.  Thus the category of Causality is schematized as the (necessary) succession of events, Actuality is schematized as existence at some determinate time, Necessity as existence at all times.  Quantity Kant schematizes as _number_, temporalized as the extension in time of counting { See | Frovin Jørgensen, 2005 | | for a set-theoretic interpretation that supports Kant's proposal |zu:243096:JCSG2V8H }.  

More generally, the schematization of the categories might be understood as a morphism from a modal logic to a lattice of moments in time.  Very schematically, if we take seriously Kant's postulate that the categories derive from types of judgments, we can define a modal logic that generates the twelve classes of statements Kant takes as primitive.  This logic can be algebrafied via Predicate Functor Logic (PFL) { | Kuhn, 1983 | | based on earlier work by Quine |zu:243096:67D737Z2}, which defines functors on the argument lists of n-ary predicates.  PFL functors might then be mapped to relations between moments in time in a temporal lattice, perhaps the aspectual event algebra of Bach { | -Bach, (1986) | | |zu:243096:PQU5967J}.  The resulting morphism, which is also the schematization of the categories, amounts to an _analogy_ from logic to time[^laterAnalogies] .  There is no _analytical_ (as opposed to transcendental) necessity to the analogy, so from the viewpoint of the understanding, the analogy amounts to a rhetorical gesture, a metaphoric transposition; the placing of two unlike things under a figural unity.  As such, the analogy/schema must emerge from that generative principle of human cognition, the imagination.   

Yet for the transcendental philosopher whose perspective encompasses the whole system, the analogy underlying the schematism is at least felicitous, because there is a structural affinity between the two sides, pure concepts versus time.  Moreover it is transcendentally necessary, by a logic of exclusion.  Again, the truth of judgments depends on their being related to experience via sensibility, and only time can translate the categories.  Now, if time is structurally compatible with the logical language of the categories, then it must of course have structure a priori, i.e. be unified by synthesis[^foot26].  Namely, time consists of moments and an ordering relation.  

> [T]he proposition that different times cannot be simultaneous cannot be derived from a general concept. The proposition is synthetic, and cannot arise from concepts alone. It is therefore immediately contained in the intuition and representation of time (A32).

And similarly for space: 

> [A]ll geometrical principles, e.g., that in a triangle two sides together are always greater than the third, are never derived from general concepts of line and triangle, but rather are derived from intuition and indeed derived a priori with apodictic certainty (A25).

> [I]t is also requisite for one to make an abstract concept sensible, i.e., display the object that corresponds to it in intuition, since without this the concept would remain (as one says) without sense, i.e., without significance. Mathematics fulfills this requirement by means of the construction of the figure, which is an appearance present to the senses (even though brought about a priori) (A239-240/B299).

The properties of space are available to the subject a priori, either as axioms, e.g. space has three dimensions, or as derived principles.  For otherwise "[o]ne would therefore only be able to say that as far as has been observed to date, no space has been found that has more than three dimensions" (A24/B39).  The subject cannot produce the fundamental syntheses of space and time in intuition; they must be given.  Kant's whole cognitive system turns on the availability built-in, synthetic, a priori knowledge of the structure of time and space.

Now, since to Kant's mind the twelve categories of the understanding reflect all basic relations in the constructions of prepositions, it follows from his argument that all applications of the categories to objects of experience (i.e. sensible representations) must be schematized.  It is impossible to think and express relations between a posteriori representations without applying schematized categories.  The schematism of the imagination is the medium of all meaningful relations.  If we think of the act of relating as the bringing together of heterogeneous elements into a determinate structure, then here once again we see the synthesizing function of the imagination at work.  In this light, the schematism emerges as the procedure by which viable cognitive structures are generated.


### Summary
While the CPR is hardly explicit in reflecting on things linguistic, I believe that Kant's transcendental epistemology can help inform our understanding of 
human linguistic competence. 

- With the pure concepts of the understanding Kant attempted to capture the logical and structural properties of propositions.  The lexical items that express these are the functional elements of language -- the functors, which includes the functional prepositions.  These are the terms Aristotle characterized as _asemos_, which in the Kantian perspective lack a posteriori content and sensible content but are nevertheless efficient causes in propositional meaning.
- Encyclopedic or world knowledge emerges from experience and is necessarily sensible.  The lexemes expressing encyclopedic knowledge are Roots.
- Mediating pure concepts and experience are the a priori forms of all intuition, space and time.  The relations of time and space are lexicalized by tense and morphological case inflection and functional prepositions, the _arthra_ of Aristotle.

On this view the lexical/functional divide is really a three-way distinction between encyclopedic, functional and spatiotemporal elements.  On a Kantian account the difficulty one encounters in classifying Adps in terms of the functional/lexical opposition is resolved.  The category is indeed split on semantic grounds, but the meaning of lexical Adps is fundamentally different than the meanings of Roots.  The sense that lexical Adps share something with functional Adps is explained by Kant's hypothesis that spatiotemporal relations are known a priori.

Finally, Kant's schematism formalizes Leibniz's intuition about the metaphoric relationship between functional and lexical prepositions.  The analogical projection of the pure concepts of the understanding into time (and space) is an essential aspect of true expression.  The imagination mediates this projection by means of its schematizing, synthesizing activity.  The structure-building work of the imagination is a primitive of the cognitive system on which all other systems depend; it is a "mystery", root of human creativity, not further analyzable, yet itself dependent on the prior syntheses of space and time which must be given.  




[^laterAnalogies]:  Thus Kant will later name the concrete application of categories to experience precisely as analogies.

[^foot26]: This goes against Kant's argument that space and time are  intuitions.  In a footnote to §26 of the B deduction he famously takes back the earlier argument:
> In the Aesthetic I ascribed this unity merely to sensibility, only in order to note that it precedes all concepts, though to be sure it presupposes a synthesis, which does not belong to the senses but through which all concepts of space and time first become possible (B160). 

[^wgwKant]: The authors make a direct appeal to Kant: "Our model of events can be seen as a version of Kant’s idea that causation is one of the _Anschauungsformen_ [forms of intuition] of human thinking" (p. 166).  This would appear to not be the correct term, as only space and time are forms of intuition, while causality belongs to the understanding as a pure concept, a category.